#summary Selected use cases for accessing Wiktionary data
#labels Featured

= JWKTL Use Cases =

This page focuses on use cases for accessing a certain kind of information type from Wiktionary, such as translations. Before taking a closer look at this page, make sure that JWKTL is correctly installed as explained in the [GettingStarted getting started] guide and familiarize yourself with the basic [JWKTLArchitecture architecture of JWKTL].

For brevity, we won't be able to describe the information types in detail, which is why we refer you to the publications mentioned on the project homepage and the Javadoc code documentation of the individual methods.

== Iterating over pages, entries, senses, relations ==

(TODO)

== Extracting sense definitions, examples, and quotations ==

The meaning of a word sense is described in a sense definition giving a brief paraphrase or usage note of a word sense (often called a "gloss"). Code example:

{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  IWiktionaryEntry entry = page.getEntry(0);
  IWiktionarySense sense = entry.getSense(1);
  System.out.println(sense.getGloss().getText());
  wkt.close();
}}}

The sense definition is encoded using the Wiki markup language. JWKTL represents such strings using the `IWikiString` interface. This facilitates accessing the original text including all markup (`getText()`) and accessing a more reader-friendly version without most of the wiki markup (`getPlainText()`).

In addition to that, the usage of a word sense might be illustrated by example sentences or quotations. Note that for the sake of memory consumption, many information types are set to `null` if no Wiktionary information is provided for this article position. Remember to check for `null` if the information type might be missing. Code example:


{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  IWiktionaryEntry entry = page.getEntry(0);
  IWiktionarySense sense = entry.getSense(1);

  // Example sentences.
  if (sense.getExamples() != null)
    for (IWikiString example : sense.getExamples())
      System.out.println(example.getText());

  // Quotations.
  if (sense.getQuotations() != null)
    for (IQuotation quotation : sense.getQuotations()) {
      for (IWikiString line : quotation.getLines())
        System.out.println(line.getText());
      System.out.println("--" + quotation.getSource().getText());
    }

  wkt.close();
}}}
	  

== Extracting semantic relations ==

Two words (word senses) can be related in their meaning, for example, by describing the same or an opposite meaning. This is modeled by what is called semantic relations pointing from one word sense to a certain target article. The following example code shows how to extract all synonyms of the noun _boat_:

{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  for (IWiktionaryEntry entry : page.getEntries())
    if (entry.getPartOfSpeech() == PartOfSpeech.NOUN)
     for (IWiktionaryRelation relation : entry.getRelations(RelationType.SYNONYM))
       System.out.println(relation.getTarget());
  wkt.close();
}}}

Accordingly, all semantic relations can be extracted:

{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  for (IWiktionaryEntry entry : page.getEntries())
    if (entry.getPartOfSpeech() == PartOfSpeech.NOUN)
      for (IWiktionaryRelation relation : entry.getRelations())
        System.out.println(relation.getRelationType() + ": " + relation.getTarget());
  wkt.close();
}}}

So far, we have accessed all semantic relations of a lexical entry regardless of the word senses. This is achieved by selecting the `IWiktionarySense` in question and essentially invoking the same methods as for the `IWiktionaryEntry`:

{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  IWiktionaryEntry entry = page.getEntry(0);
  IWiktionarySense sense = entry.getSense(1);
  for (IWiktionaryRelation relation : sense.getRelations(RelationType.SYNONYM))
    System.out.println(relation.getTarget());
  wkt.close();
}}}

Semantic relations that could not be associated to a specific word sense are gathered within the unassigned sense:

{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  IWiktionaryEntry entry = page.getEntry(0);
  IWiktionarySense unassigned = entry.getUnassignedSense();
  for (IWiktionaryRelation relation : unassigned.getRelations(RelationType.SYNONYM))
    System.out.println(relation.getTarget());
  wkt.close();
}}}



== Extracting translations ==

Wiktionary encodes a large number of translations, which are represented as a hyperlink from one article to another. The German translation of the English word _boat_ can, for instance, be accessed using the following code:

{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  for (IWiktionaryEntry entry : page.getEntries())
    if (entry.getPartOfSpeech() == PartOfSpeech.NOUN)
      for (IWiktionaryTranslation translation : entry.getTranslations(Language.GERMAN))
        System.out.println(translation.getTranslation());
  wkt.close();
}}}

Accordingly, it is easy to print a list of all translations encoded for the noun _boat_:

{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  for (IWiktionaryEntry entry : page.getEntries())
    if (entry.getPartOfSpeech() == PartOfSpeech.NOUN)
      for (IWiktionaryTranslation translation : entry.getTranslations())
        System.out.println(translation.getLanguage() + ": " + translation.getTranslation());
  wkt.close();
}}}

For the semantic relations, we have seen that many of them are associated with a certain word sense. This also applies to the translations. The following sample code extracts the German translations of the first word sense of _boat_ (i.e., the meaning of a water vessel):

{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  IWiktionaryEntry entry = page.getEntry(0);
  IWiktionarySense sense = entry.getSense(1);
  for (IWiktionaryTranslation translation : sense.getTranslations(Language.GERMAN))
      System.out.println(translation.getTranslation());
  wkt.close();
}}}

Again, translations that could not be associated to a specific word sense are gathered within the unassigned sense:

{{{
  IWiktionaryEdition wkt = JWKTL.openEdition(WIKTIONARY_DIRECTORY);
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  IWiktionaryEntry entry = page.getEntry(0);
  IWiktionarySense unassigned = entry.getUnassignedSense();
  for (IWiktionaryTranslation translation : unassigned.getTranslations(Language.GERMAN))
      System.out.println(translation.getTranslation());
  wkt.close();
}}}


== Multilingual processing ==

(TODO)