#summary Overview on important JWKTL classes
#labels Featured

= JWKTL Architecture =

== Article pages ==

The primary building blocks of Wiktionary are article pages, which contain lexicographic information on a specific word form (e.g., "boat"). This can include multiple parts of speech (e.g., the noun and the verb "plant") and multiple languages (e.g., "fog" in English and Hungarian). JWKTL makes use of the `IWiktionaryPage` interface to represent these article pages. They may be queried either by their unique ID or the described word form. For each page, the title (i.e., the word form), the date, revision ID, and author of the last revision, the language of the embracing Wiktionary language edition, the set of language codes occuring as interwiki-links, and the target of a possible redirection. Code example:

{{{
  WiktionaryFormatter formatter = WiktionaryFormatter.instance();

  // Query by ID.
  IWiktionaryPage page = wkt.getPageForId(7377);
  System.out.println(formatter.formatHeader(page));

  // Query by word form.
  page = wkt.getPageForWord("boat");
  System.out.println(formatter.formatHeader(page));
}}}

== Lexical entries ==

Each combination of language and part of speech described on an article page yields a separate instance of `IWiktionaryEntry` (i.e., multiple lexical entries sharing the same page). Besides the language and the part of speech, an entry encodes the etymology, gender (if applicable), pronunciations, inflected word forms, as well as links to a related entry containing more information (e.g., in case of alternative spellings). The entries can be accessed using the `IWiktionaryPage` instance they are contained in or using the API directly. Note that search queries are case sensitive by default and thus return different results for looking up "rom", "Rom", or "ROM". An optional parameter can be used to initiate case insensitive search. Code example:

{{{
  // Access by page.
  List<IWiktionaryEntry> entries = page.getEntries();
  for (IWiktionaryEntry entry : entries)
    System.out.println(WiktionaryFormatter.instance().formatHeader(entry));

  // Query by word form (case sensitive).
  entries = wkt.getEntriesForWord("boat");
  for (IWiktionaryEntry entry : entries)
    System.out.println(WiktionaryFormatter.instance().formatHeader(entry));

  // Query by word form (case insensitive).
  entries = wkt.getEntriesForWord("rom", true);
  for (IWiktionaryEntry entry : entries)
			System.out.println(WiktionaryFormatter.instance().formatHeader(entry));
}}}

== Word senses ==

(TODO)